Genome sequences and population genomics provide
insights into the demographic history, inbreeding, and
mutation load of two ‘living fossil’ tree species of Dipteronia
Yu Feng1,2,6 ,HansPeter Comes3
Kenneth M. Olsen8,*
,JunChen1 ,ShanshanZhu1,4 ,RuisenLu5, Xinyi Zhang1,6, Pan Li1 ,JieQiu7,
andYingxiong Qiu6,*
1Systematic & Evolutionary Botany and Biodiversity group, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
Zhejiang, China,
2CAS Key Laboratory of Mountain Ecological Restoration and Bioresource Utilization & Ecological Restoration and Biodiver
sity Conservation Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, Chengdu Institute of Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chengdu
610041, China,
3Department of Environment & Biodiversity, Salzburg University, Salzburg, Austria,
4State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality and Safety of Agro-Products, Ningbo
University, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315211, China,
5Institute of Botany, Jiangsu Province and Chinese Academy of Sciences, Nanjing 210014, China,
6Wuhan Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, Hubei 430074, China,
7Shanghai Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Sciences, College of Life Sciences, Shanghai Normal University, Shanghai
200234, China, and
8Department of Biology, Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, Missouri 63130, USA
Received 17 November 2022; revised 29 August 2023; accepted 20 September 2023; published online 5 October 2023.
*For correspondence (e-mail qyxhero@zju.edu.cn, qiuyingxiong@wbgcas.cn; kolsen@wustl.edu).
SUMMARY
‘Living fossils’, that is, ancient lineages of low taxonomic diversity, represent an exceptional evolutionary
heritage, yet we know little about how demographic history and deleterious mutation load have affected
their long-term survival and extinction risk. We performed whole-genome sequencing and population geno
mic analyses on Dipteronia sinensis and D. dyeriana, two East Asian Tertiary relict trees. We found large
scale genome reorganizations and identified species-specific genes under positive selection that are likely
involved in adaptation. Our demographic analyses suggest that the wider-ranged D. sinensis repeatedly
recovered from population bottlenecks over late Tertiary/Quaternary periods of adverse climate conditions,
while the population size of the narrow-ranged D. dyeriana steadily decreased since the late Miocene, espe
cially after the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM). We conclude that the efficient purging of deleterious muta
tions in D. sinensis facilitated its survival and repeated demographic recovery. By contrast, in D. dyeriana,
increased genetic drift and reduced selection efficacy, due to recent severe population bottlenecks and a
likely preponderance of vegetative propagation, resulted in fixation of strongly deleterious mutations,
reduced fitness, and continuous population decline, with likely detrimental consequences for the species’
future viability and adaptive potential. Overall, our findings highlight the significant impact of demographic
history on levels of accumulation and purging of putatively deleterious mutations that likely determine the
long-term survival and extinction risk of Tertiary relict trees.
Keywords: conservation genomics, demographic history, mutation load, population genomics, tertiary relict
species.
INTRODUCTION
In most lineages, new species are formed while others
become extinct, yet some ancient lineages of low taxo
nomic diversity, often termed ‘living fossils’, have neither
gone extinct nor produced many new species and have
remained relatively unchanged morphologically over long
periods of evolutionary time (Lidgard & Love, 2018; Vargas
et al., 2020; Werth & Shear, 2014). Among the northern
temperate regions, East Asia harbors the highest richness
of ‘living fossil’ tree genera (e.g., Ginkgo, Metasequoia,
2023 Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
177
178 YuFeng et al.
 1365313x, 2024, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tpj.16486, Wiley Online Library on [06/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Cercidiphyllum, and Dipteronia); yet, in contrast to their
generally wider distributions in the Northern Hemisphere
during the Tertiary, extant populations of these Tertiary rel
ict trees are often small and isolated (Milne & Abbott,
2002). This implies an increased risk of extinction due to
impacts on their genetic makeup from human activities, cli
mate change, and/or demographic stochasticity (Charles
worth & Willis, 2009; Kardos et al., 2018; Lynch et al., 1995;
Nor´ en et al., 2016). Of the few genomic studies that have
focused on East Asian living fossil trees to date (e.g.,
Ginkgo biloba: Zhao et al., 2019; Cercidiphyllum japoni
cum: Zhu et al., 2020), all have suggested multiple popula
tion declines, but sometimes also recoveries, over late
Tertiary/Quaternary timescales (Zhu et al., 2020). However,
little is known about the relationship between demo
graphic history, genetic variation, long-term survival, and
population viability in these Tertiary relict species.
In general, the evolution of deleterious mutation load
is a key genetic factor affecting species survival (Butcher
1995; Grossen et al., 2020; Poon & Otto, 2000; Whitlock &
B¨ urger, 2009). Species living in small and isolated popula
tions are expected to experience high levels of inbreeding
that will increase the frequency and expression of deleteri
ous recessive mutations (genetic load) (Charlesworth &
Willis, 2009). However, levels of genetic load may also be
minimized by sustained purging of strongly deleterious
mutations resulting from long-term population bottlenecks
(Ochoa & Gibbs, 2021). Such a pattern has been observed
in several critically endangered species (Benazzo et al.,
2017; Grossen et al., 2020; Robinson et al., 2016, 2018; Xue
et al., 2015; Yates et al., 2019). Counterintuitively, some
Tertiary relict trees do not show signs of such purging but
rather indications of mutation load and inbreeding depres
sion (Li et al., 2011; Nor´ en et al., 2016), as evidenced, for
example, by poor seedling recruitment in the wild (e.g.,
Metasequoia glyptostroboides: Tang et al., 2011; Ginkgo
biloba: Tang et al., 2012; Lin et al., 2022).
A large number of Tertiary relict trees are restricted to
local habitats with moderate disturbance regimes (Tang
et al., 2018). An important factor in the persistence of these
small, naturally fragmented populations is almost certainly
their capacity for multiple modes of reproduction, includ
ing vegetative reproduction that can permit extreme lon
gevity (perhaps over millennia) of locally adapted genets
(Bezemer et al., 2019). However, it remains unclear to what
extent typical life-history traits of Tertiary relict trees (e.g.,
individual genet longevity via the ability to repeatedly
resprout) and/or population demographic histories have
influenced their genome-wide accumulation vs. purging of
deleterious mutations (e.g., during periods of population
size decline), and thus their local risk of extinction vs. sur
vival and demographic recovery.
Dipteronia Oliv. (Sapindaceae, Hippocastanoideae)
contains just two extant deciduous tree species, D. sinensis
Oliv. and D. dyeriana Henry, both endemic to China. This
Tertiary relict genus is the closest relative of Acer L.
(Acevedo-Rodrı´guez et al., 2010), and is documented in the
fossil records of both North America and East Asia from
the early Paleocene to the early Oligocene (Ding et al.,
2018; Manchester et al., 2009; McClain & Manchester, 2001).
The two extant species are similar in several morphologi
cal and reproductive characteristics. For instance, individ
ual trees are andromonoecious (having both male and
bisexual flowers in paniculate inflorescences), and have
winged nutlets dispersed by gravity, wind, and/or water
(Xu et al., 2008). Both species reproduce by insect
mediated outcrossing and tend to be more dependent
on vegetative reproduction for their recruitment and
long-term persistence in disturbed habitats or harsh envi
ronments (Qiu et al., 2007). In addition, both trees start
bearing fruits at the age of 5–10 years but only reach their
full reproductive potential after about 20 years (Ouyang
et al., 2006).
Despite these similarities, these two species differ
markedly in other key aspects of their biology. Dipteronia
sinensis and D. dyeriana differ in chromosome number, that
is, 2n = 2x = 20 vs. 18 (L¨ ove, 1979; Oginuma et al., 1994;
Wolfe & Tanai, 1987), height (c.10–15 vs. 5–10 m), and fruit
(nutlet) size (c. 2 vs. 5 cm; Appendix S1;FiguresS1 and S2)
(Ding et al., 2018;Xuetal.,2008). With respect to habitat,
D. sinensis is widespread in the warm-temperate deciduous
forests of central and southwestern China, where it typically
grows in sheltered interior forest locations at a wide range
of elevations between 1000 and 2400 m a.s.l.; by contrast,
D. dyeriana is a rare endemic from southeastern Yunnan
Province (southwestern China) (Chen, Gl´ emin, & Lascoux,
2017;Xuet al., 2008), where it occurs between 1900 and
2300 m a.s.l. in only a small area (c.6km2), within and out
side the Wenshan National Reserve (WNR), on the margins
of broadleaved evergreen forests (Qiu et al., 2007). Else
where in Yunnan and adjacent Guizhou Province, popula
tions of D. dyeriana went extinct about 30 years ago (Su
et al., 2006; Zhang, 2000). Another natural population
located in Malipo County, which is c. 100 km away from
WNR, was rediscovered in 2017. Surrounded by farmland
with less than 10 adult individuals, this small, isolated popu
lation is presently at the greatest risk of extinction (Y.X. Qiu,
pers. obs.). Where unprotected, the typical forest-margin
habitats of D. dyeriana have declined considerably in recent
decades due to deforestation and clearing for agriculture
(Su et al., 2006). Accordingly, differential fluctuations in pop
ulation size of the two species are likely due to extrinsic fac
tors related to the locations of their ranges, rather than
differences in life histories. Overall, Dipteronia represents an
ideal model system to study the genomic consequences of
long-term demographic isolation in an endangered, narrow
endemic (D. dyeriana) compared to its wider-ranging sister
species (D. sinensis).
2023 Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
The Plant Journal, (2024), 117, 177–192
Conservation genomics of Dipteronia 179
 1365313x, 2024, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tpj.16486, Wiley Online Library on [06/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
In this study, we first sequenced and de novo assem
bled the chromosome-scale genomes of each Dipteronia
species. For population genomics analysis, we further sam
pled 16 populations of D. sinensis and seven populations
of D. dyeriana (Tables S1 and S2). Based on these genomic
data, we reconstructed the demographic history of frag
mentation and population size reduction of the two spe
cies. For intraspecific lineages that appeared to have
undergone different demographic histories, we then ana
lyzed patterns of genome-wide diversity and deleterious
variation, levels of inbreeding, and the efficiency of purify
ing selection to gain insights into inbreeding depression
and potential risks of population collapse. We addressed
the following specific questions: (1) How has past climate
change, including Quaternary glacial–interglacial cycles,
influenced the demographic histories of each Dipteronia
species? (2) How has the combination of population bottle
necks and inbreeding shaped the genomic landscapes of
each species and their intraspecific lineages? (3) To what
extent have deleterious mutations accumulated or been
purged in these Tertiary relict species/lineages, and
thereby influencing their local extinction risk vs. survival
and demographic recovery?
RESULTS
Genome evolution and signatures of positive selection
The de novo genomes of Dipteronia sinensis and D. dyeri
ana were sequenced to approximately 365× and approxi
mately 250× depth of coverage, respectively (Table S3).
The assembled genome sequences were 711.47 Mb (scaf
fold N50 of 71.32 Mb; contig N50 of 3.82 Mb) in Dipteronia
sinensis (Figure 1a) and 914.77 Mb (scaffold N50 of
110.51 Mb; contig N50 of 11.27 Mb) in D. dyeriana
(Figure 1b) with high contiguity, coverage, and accuracy
(Appendix S2; Figures S3 and S4; Tables S4–S7). About
61.48% of the D. sinensis genome and 65.71% of the
D. dyeriana genome were composed of repetitive elements
(Tables S8 and S9). A total of 33 233 and 32 822 protein
coding genes were predicted in the genomes of D. sinensis
and D. dyeriana, respectively (Table S10).
Phylogenetic analysis of 196 single-copy orthologs
shared by all 16 Rosid species included in this study con
f
irmed the sister relationship between Dipteronia and Acer
(Figure 1d) and dated the crown age (the age of the most
recent common ancestor) of Dipteronia to c. 53.84 (95%
HPD: 58.15–50.32) million years ago (Mya) (Figure S5).
When compared to the genomes of the two Acer species
for which genome sequences are available, Dipteronia
dyeriana and D. sinensis contained fewer collinear gene
pairs (Dipteronia: 51.96% vs. Acer: 59.37%) and had larger
peak values of synonymous substitution rate, Ks (Diptero
nia: 0.081 vs. Acer: 0.045; Table S11, Figure S6a). In the
within-species Ks plot (Figure S6b), these four
Hippocastanoideae species showed peaks similar to Vitis
vinifera, indicating that no whole-genome duplications
(WGDs) other than the typical core eudicot ‘γ event’ (Li &
Barker, 2020) have occurred in these species.
Using branch-site likelihood-ratio tests (LRTs), we
identified 386 putative positively selected genes (PSGs) in
D. sinensis and 256 PSGs in D. dyeriana (Table S12).
Among the PSGs in D. sinensis, 77 were enriched for the
term ‘response to stimulus’ (GO: 0050896; P = 3.88e–6,
FDR = 0.012; Table S12), including several genes related
to cold stress response and plant immunity (e.g., HPT1,
DIR7; Table S13). By contrast, PSGs in D. dyeriana
mainly encoded genes involved in ‘biological regulation’
(GO:0065007, 48 genes; P = 4.08e–3, FDR = 1; Table S12),
and more than 20 of them were related to leaf and chloro
plast development in response to light (e.g., CP33, ISCA;
Table S13).
Population structure, genomic diversity, and inbreeding
Whole-genome resequencing of 54 D. sinensis and 40
D. dyeriana individuals generated mean coverages of 24×
and 19×, respectively (Table S2). After genotyping and
stringent quality filtering, a final set of 5 231 915 SNPs for
D. sinensis and 2 157 204 SNPs for D. dyeriana were
selected for genetic diversity estimates (Table S14). Not
unexpectedly, the narrow endemic D. dyeriana (Figure 2a)
had lower genome-wide nucleotide diversity than the
wider-ranged D. sinensis (θπ = 5.15 × 10 4, θW = 4.74 × 10 4
vs. θπ = 2.98 × 10 3, θW = 1.42 × 10 3). Only unlinked and
intergenic SNPs (D. sinensis: 161503;D. dyeriana: 211320)
were used for the population structure and phylogenetic
analysis. ADMIXTURE identified K = 2andK = 3 as the optimal
number of genetic clusters for D. sinensis and D. dyeriana,
respectively (Figure S7), consistent with the respective PCAs
and ML trees (Figures S8–S10). The two clusters (hereafter
‘lineages’) of D. sinensis were distributed north and south of
the Yangtze River, respectively (Figure 2b; North: Qinling
Dabashan Mts. and northeastern Hengduan Mts.; South:
eastern Yungui Plateau). Similarly, the three lineages of
D. dyeriana were also geographically clustered, with two
(WS and LZ) in and around the WNR, and one (MLP) in Mal
ipo County (Figure 2b,c). For each species, additional sub
clusters were detected at higher K values (Figure 2d,e).
Notably, despite their smaller geographic range, the three
lineages of D. dyeriana were more strongly differentiated
(pairwise FST = 0.22–0.41) than the North and South lineages
of D. sinensis (FST = 0.04; Table S15).
Within D. dyeriana, all five adult trees examined in
MLP were close relatives of less than third-degree, and
three of them (MLP01, MLP03, and MLP05) were identified
as putatively duplicate samples that may represent clones
(ramets) of vegetative propagation (Tables S16 and S17).
Closely related individual pairs were also found in the LZ
lineage of D. dyeriana and the two lineages of D. sinensis
2023 Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
The Plant Journal, (2024), 117, 177–192
180 YuFeng et al.
 1365313x, 2024, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tpj.16486, Wiley Online Library on [06/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Figure 1. Genome evolution of the two Dipteronia species. Circos plots of chromosome-level assembly of the genomes of (a) D. sinensis and (b) D. dyeriana.
The circles, from outermost to innermost, show (i) gene density, (ii) repeat element density, (iii) single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) density for population
genomic analysis, (iv) GC content, and (v) syntenic regions within each genome. The four metrics were calculated in 1 Mb sliding windows.
(c) Synteny pattern among Acer truncatum, A. yangbiense, Dipteronia sinensis, and D. dyeriana.
(d) MCMCTREE-derived chronogram of 16 Rosid species, including D. sinensis and D. dyeriana, based on 196 single-copy orthologous genes. The number at each
node represents the median divergence time (in million years ago, Mya), with blue bars representing the 95% highest posterior density (HPD) interval. Numbers
in color report the number of gene families that expanded (orange) and contracted (blue) on each branch.
(Tables S16 and S17). In most individuals of each species,
we observed a ‘sawtooth-like’ pattern characterized by
long runs of homozygosity (ROH) or low heterozygous
regions interspersed with regions of high heterozygosity
(Figure S11). Individuals of D. sinensis showed, on aver
age, higher genome-scale heterozygosity and lower levels
of inbreeding (H = 0.49 per kb; FROH = 0.30) than those of
D. dyeriana (H = 0.27 per kb; FROH = 0.41; P < 0.01;
Figure 3a,b; Figure S12). Within D. sinensis, individuals
from the North lineage showed on average lower levels of
inbreeding (H = 0.52 per kb; FROH = 0.27) than those from
the South lineage (H = 0.44 per kb; FROH = 0.36; P < 0.05;
Figure 3a,b; Figure S12), which had a smaller inferred
effective population size (Ne) (Table S14; see below). Corre
spondingly, the North lineage had higher genetic diversity
(θπ = 6.99 × 10 4, θW = 1.27 × 10 3) than the South lineage
(θπ = 5.78 × 10 4, θW = 5.97 × 10 4) (Figure 3c; Table S14).
In D. dyeriana, the MLP lineage had the lowest census pop
ulation size (Nc = 5), followed by LZ (Nc = 104) and WS
(Nc = 9671, Table S1; however, when compared to both
latter lineages, MLP showed the lowest level of inbreeding
(H = 0.41 per kb, FROH = 0.18; P < 0.01; Figure 3a,b), as
well as the second highest θπ value (3.53 × 10 4) and the
highest θW value (2.95 × 10 4) (Figure 3c; Table S14).
Within-population estimates of FIS values (window
based) in the two lineages of D. sinensis (North, South)
2023 Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
The Plant Journal, (2024), 117, 177–192
Conservation genomics of Dipteronia 181
 1365313x, 2024, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tpj.16486, Wiley Online Library on [06/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Figure 2. Population genetic structure of the two Dipteronia species.
(a) Overall visualization of sampling locations. Dots represent sample locations of D. sinensis. The two black rectangles represent the two main distribution loca
tions of D. dyeriana. Red stars represent the sample locations of the two reference genome trees.
(b) Geographic distribution of ADMIXTURE clusters for the 15 populations of D. sinensis at K = 2 (i.e., the optimal solution). Color is in correspondence to (d) and
circle size indicates sample size (see Table S2 for detailed sample information).
(c) Geographic distribution of ADMIXTURE clusters for the seven populations of D. dyeriana at K = 3.
(d) Population genetic structure for D. sinensis at K = 2toK = 5. North vs. South lineages at K = 2 are indicated at the bottom. (e) Population structure for
D. dyeriana at K = 2toK = 4. Names of major lineages at K = 3 (i.e., WS, LZ, and MLP) are indicated at the bottom.
and the largest lineage of D. dyeriana (WS) were mainly
distributed between 0 and 0.5 (Figure 3c; Figure S13), sug
gesting a degree of inbreeding due to mating between
close relatives (Table S17). By contrast, in the smaller-sized
LZ and MLP lineages of D. dyeriana, FIS values were mostly
negative (FIS <0; Figure 3c; Figure S12). Together, the com
bination of heterozygote excess and high nucleotide diver
sity detected in the LZ and MLP lineages suggests that the
high observed heterozygosity is the legacy of a once much
larger, genetically diverse, and outcrossing population,
which recently experienced rapid population decline. The
increased proportion of vegetative propagation in LZ and
MLP may have facilitated the maintenance of high
heterozygosity in these small and isolated populations (see
below).
Demographic and divergence histories
According to our PSMC analyses of demographic history,
most lineages/populations of D. sinensis and D. dyeriana
experienced a prolonged decline in Ne from the late
Miocene to the middle Pleistocene (c. 5.0–0.8 Mya;
Figure 4a,b, Figures S14 and S15); afterward, however,
during the Naynayxungla glaciation, c. 0.5–0.7 Mya (Zheng
et al., 2002), Ne values increased to varying degrees before
decreasing again prior to the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM;
c. 21 thousand years ago, kya). Declines were particularly
2023 Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
The Plant Journal, (2024), 117, 177–192
182 YuFeng et al.
 1365313x, 2024, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tpj.16486, Wiley Online Library on [06/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Figure 3. Estimates of inbreeding and genetic diversity. Comparisons of (a) genome heterozygosity (H) and (b) estimates of individual genome-based inbreed
ing (FROH) between species (Did: D. dyeriana; Dis: D. sinensis) and lineages (D. sinensis, North, South; D. dyeriana: WS, LZ, MLP). P-values of pairwise compari
sons were calculated using Wilcoxon test: *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; ****, P < 0.0001; ns, not significant. (c) Distributions of nucleotide diversity
parameters (θπ, θW, Tajima’s D, and FIS) for each lineage calculated in 100-kb non-overlapping windows across the genome.
pronounced in the two southernmost populations of
D. sinensis (based on individuals FDS04 and FJS12; see
Figure 4a,b, Figures S14 and S15). Considering more
recent (i.e., postglacial/Holocene) time scales, SMC++ indi
cated considerable declines in Ne for most lineages, either
slowly (South lineage of D. sinensis; WS lineage of
D. dyeriana) or more rapidly (LZ and MLP lineages of
D. dyeriana); a notable exception was the North lineage
of D. sinensis, whose population size increased rapidly
after the LGM (Figure S16a,b). STAIRWAY PLOT analyses confirmed
the strong recent decline of the MLP lineage (Figure S16c)but
indicated relatively stable population sizes for all other line
ages during the past 5000 years (Figure S16c).
According to the best-fit FASTSIMCOAL2 model for
D. sinensis (Figure 4c; Tables S18 and S19), the North and
South lineages diverged from their common ancestor in
the early Pliocene, c. 3.91 Mya. This model also confirmed
that the South lineage experienced a contraction after the
LGM (Figure 4c; Table S19). For D. dyeriana, the best-fit
model dated the early divergence of the MLP lineage to
c. 1.60 Mya and the subsequent split of the WS and LZ lin
eages to c. 0.77 Mya (Figure 4d; Tables S20 and S21).
According to this model, both LZ and MLP lineages experi
enced a massive decrease in Ne over the last 5000 years
(Figure 4d; Table S21). For each Dipteronia species, esti
mates of bi-directional gene flow revealed low levels
of gene exchange among all pairs of lineages up to
the LGM, after which gene flow ceased among lineages
(Figure 4c,d).
Accumulation and purging of putatively deleterious
mutations
For both Dipteronia species, we found weaker efficacy of
purifying selection (i.e., higher ratios of πN/πS; Kimura,
1983) in smaller-sized populations/lineages compared to
larger ones (Table S22). Based on SNPs from protein
coding genes (in total 191 386 vs. 36 693 in D. sinensis vs.
D. dyeriana), we further explored the accumulation
vs. purging of putatively deleterious mutations in each
species and lineage (Table S23). Among these SNPs,
26 343 (D. sinensis) and 4412 (D. dyeriana) were predicted
to be potentially mildly deleterious mutations by both SIFT
and PROVEAN. In addition, SNPEFF identified 2120 and 649
putatively strongly deleterious (putative loss-of-function,
LoF) mutations in D. sinensis and D. dyeriana, respectively.
A predicted enrichment in homozygous sites with such del
eterious mutations in ROH regions (Szpiech et al., 2013)
was observed in only one individual of D. sinensis (HH02)
and three individuals of D. dyeriana (CPT16, MLP03, and
MLP04).
For mildly deleterious mutations, statistical analysis of
both pa (proportion of deleterious mutations) and pg
2023 Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
The Plant Journal, (2024), 117, 177–192
Conservation genomics of Dipteronia 183
 1365313x, 2024, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tpj.16486, Wiley Online Library on [06/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Figure 4. Population size through time plots for (a) Dipteronia sinensis (n = 10) and (b) D. dyeriana (n = 6) based on pairwise sequentially Markovian coalescent
(PSMC) modeling. The time scale on the x-axis is calculated assuming a mutation rate (μ) of 8.17 × 10 9 per site per generation and a generation time (g)of
10 years. The Last Glacial Maximum (LGM; c. 21 kya) and the Naynayxungla glaciation (c. 0.5–0.7 Mya17) are highlighted in gray vertical bars.
(c–d) Demographic scenarios modeled for (c) D. sinensis and (d) D. dyeriana, using FASTSIMCOAL2, with median times in years, as well as estimates of effective
population sizes (Ne) and migration rates (see Tables S19 and S21 for 95% confidence intervals). For each species, estimates of gene flow between linages are
given as the migration fraction per generation. kya, thousand years ago; Mya, million years ago.
(proportion of deleterious genotypes, p0/1 for heterozygous
genotypes and p1/1 for homozygous derived genotypes)
were significantly higher in D. dyeriana than D. sinensis
(P < 0.01; Figure 5a; Table S24). In D. sinensis, the South
lineage with smaller Ne had significantly higher values of
pa and p1/1 (P < 0.01) but not p0/1 (P > 0.05) than the North
lineage (Figure 5a; Table S24). In D. dyeriana, the smaller
sized MLP lineage showed significantly higher values of pa
and p0/1 (P < 0.05), but not p1/1 compared to LZ and WS
lineage (P > 0.05, Figure 5a). For the putative LoF muta
tions, D. dyeriana exhibited significantly higher values of
pa and pg than D. sinensis (P < 0.05; Figure 5a, Table S24).
In D. dyerina, the MLP lineage was found to have higher pa
and pg than the LZ and WS lineages (P < 0.05; Figure 5a,
Table S24). In D. sinensis, the South lineages showed sig
nificantly lower pa and p0/1 of LoF mutations than the
North lineage (P < 0.05), the former had a significantly
higher proportion of heterozygous genotypes (p0/1)
than the latter (P < 0.05; Figure 5a,b). After subjecting indi
viduals of each species to linear regression tests, signifi
cantly negative correlations were observed between the
proportion of mildly deleterious mutations and Ne in
D. sinensis (r = 0.43; P < 0.01; Figure 5b). However, no
significant correlation was found between proportion of
mildly deleterious mutations and Nc or Ne in D. dyeriana
(P > 0.05; Figure 5b). In contrast to mildly deleterious
mutations,
D.
sinensis
showed no significant
correlation between the proportion of LoF mutations and
Ne (P > 0.05), whereas D. dyeriana exhibited a negative
correlation between both Ne and Nc and the proportion of
LoF mutations (r = 0.46 for Ne and r = 0.73 for Nc;
P < 0.01; Figure 5b).
To further assess the relative mutation load between
populations and purging of different deleterious mutations
in the smaller populations, we used the standardized RX/Y
method (Xue et al., 2015) to estimate the relative excess of
number of putatively deleterious alleles in one population
compared to another (Figure 5c; Table S25). In D. sinensis,
the smaller-sized South lineage showed an excess of
mildly deleterious mutations compared to the larger-sized
North lineage (RSouth/North = 1.13), whereas LoF mutations
were slightly reduced (RSouth/North = 0.98; Figure 5c;
2023 Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
The Plant Journal, (2024), 117, 177–192
184 YuFeng et al.
 1365313x, 2024, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tpj.16486, Wiley Online Library on [06/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Figure 5. Accumulation and purging of deleterious mutations in the two Dipteronia species.
(a) Proportion of derived alleles (pa), heterozygous genotypes (p0/1), and homozygous derived genotypes (p1/1) in mildly (DEL) or putatively highly deleterious
(LoF) mutations for D. sinensis (Dis), D. dyeriana (Did), lineages within D. sinensis (South, North) and lineages within D. dyeriana (WS, LZ, MLP).
(b) Correlation between the proportion of deleterious mutations (DEL, LoF) and effective population size (Ne, see Table S14) across populations/lineages of both
species, and between the proportion of mildly deleterious mutations (DEL) and census population size (Nc) across the three populations/lineages of D. dyeriana.
(c) Analysis of RX/Y values, contrasting small vs. large populations/lineages in D. dyeriana (LZ vs. WS, ML vs. WS) and D. sinensis (South vs. North), for DEL and
LoF mutations, respectively. RX/Y < 1 indicates a relative frequency deficit of mildly deleterious or LoF mutations in small populations compared to large popula
tions. RX/Y distributions are based on jack-knifing across the genome. DEL: single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with mildly deleterious mutations, as pre
dicted by both SIFT and PROVEAN; LoF: SNPs with strongly deleterious (loss-of-function) mutations, as predicted by SNPEFF. P-values of pairwise comparisons were
calculated using Wilcoxon test: *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; ****, P < 0.0001; ns, not significant.
Table S25). Furthermore, the frequency distributions of LoF
mutations, especially in the North lineage, were downward
shifted to low frequencies compared to moderate-impact
and synonymous mutations (Figure S17). However, in
D. dyeriana, the smaller-sized LZ and MLP lineages
had less mildly deleterious mutations (RMLP/WS = 0.55,
RLZ/WS = 0.66; Figure 5c; Table S25) compared to the
larger-sized WS lineage. LZ lineage had less LoF mutations
(RLZ/WS = 0.96), whereas the MLP lineage had slightly more
LoF mutations (RMLP/WS = 1.02) compared to the WS line
age. A comparison of scaled additive genetic load revealed
more purging of mildly deleterious mutations but less
purging of LoF mutations in LZ and MLP than in WS
(P < 0.05; Figure S18). Moreover, the frequency distribu
tion of LoF mutations was shifted upwards in MLP, with a
considerable proportion of those mutations being fixed in
this lineage (12.3%; Figure S17).
In the smaller lineage of D. sinensis (South), only 6 of
11 genes with fixed LoF mutations, and 20 of 38 genes
with fixed mildly deleterious mutations, were annotated
successfully (Table S26). In contrast, in the MLP lineage of
D. dyeriana, 19 of 37 genes with fixed LoF mutations, and
173 of 259 genes with fixed mildly deleterious mutations,
were functionally annotated (Table S27). Among these
genes, there was some enrichment for particular functions,
including stimulus response (e.g., TPR2, AT3G14460, and
RFNR2), RNA catabolic process (e.g., ICME and ABCG33),
and seed development (e.g., PEBP and SCRM) (Table S27).
DISCUSSION
The evolving genomes of two ‘living fossil’ tree species
We here dated the crown age of Dipteronia to the Paleo
cene/Eocene boundary, c. 53.84 Mya (95% HPD: 58.15
2023 Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
The Plant Journal, (2024), 117, 177–192
Conservation genomics of Dipteronia 185
 1365313x, 2024, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tpj.16486, Wiley Online Library on [06/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
50.32 Mya; Figure 1d), consistent with our previous phylo
genomic time estimate (c. 55–58 Mya; Feng et al., 2019).
This timing broadly coincides with the Paleocene–Eocene
Thermal Maximum (PETM), c. 55–56 Mya (Schumann
et al., 2008; Sexton et al., 2014). In East Asia, the PETM
was associated with the transition from semi-arid to more
humid conditions due to changes in the monsoon system
(Farnsworth et al., 2019). Possibly, therefore, this paleocli
matic event fostered the divergence of the two Dipteronia
species in southwestern China, for instance, through habitat
fragmentation across elevational ranges (Ding et al., 2018).
Consistent with their ancient divergence, D. sinensis
and D. dyeriana markedly differ in genome size (711.47 Mb
vs. 914.77 Mb) and chromosome number (2n = 20 vs. 18),
and exhibit extensive, species-specific genomic rearrange
ments (Figure 1c). Furthermore, despite a high degree of
morphological similarity between the two species (Ding
et al., 2018), we identified multiple signatures of species
specific positive selection at functionally important genes
related to cold stress response/immunity and leaf/chloro
plast development, respectively (Tables S12 and S13).
Hence, these potentially adaptive genes may have played a
role in the ecological divergence of these two Tertiary relict
species.
When compared with the ancient origin of the two
Dipteronia species, the coalescent times of their extant
populations/lineages are relatively young, dating back to
either the early Pliocene (D. sinensis; Figure 4b) or the
early/middle Pleistocene (D. dyeriana; Figure 4d; see also
Figure S5). Ancient origins of lineages but with recent pop
ulation coalescent times of extant species are also found in
other ‘living fossil’ tree genera, such as Ginkgo (Zhao
et al., 2019), Cercidiphyllum (Zhu et al., 2020), and Cycas
(Liu et al., 2021).
Mutation load shaped by historical demography
Our historical demographic models indicate that D. sinen
sis repeatedly recovered from bottlenecks over late Ter
tiary/Quaternary periods of adverse climate conditions
(Figure 4), as also reported for other ‘living fossil’ trees
(e.g., Ginkgo biloba: Zhao et al., 2019; Cercidiphyllum japo
nicum: Zhu et al., 2020). By contrast, the effective popula
tion size (Ne)ofD. dyeriana continuously decreased since
the late Miocene (Figure 4). Notably, except for the North
lineage of D. sinensis, all other lineages of both species
experienced severe bottlenecks after the LGM (Figure S16),
followed by a complete disruption of inter-lineage gene
f
low (Figure 4c,d). Possibly because of these demographic
events, we observed a strong phylogeographic structure in
both species (Figure 2; Table S15), with the narrow
endemic D. dyeriana exhibiting a greater degree of inter
lineage differentiation (WS, LZ, MLP: pairwise FST = 0.22
0.41) compared to the more the widely distributed
D. sinensis (North, South: FST = 0.04; Table S15).
For D. dyeriana, our coalescent-based demographic
(FASTSIMCOAL2) analyses (Figure 4d) revealed that long-term
isolation and/or habitat fragmentation caused by early/mid
dle Pleistocene climate change contributed to prolonged
genetic isolation among lineages, regardless of their geo
graphic proximity (especially between LZ and WS).
Moreover, many individuals of both Dipteronia spe
cies displayed a ‘sawtooth-like’ pattern of long runs of
homozygosity (ROH) interspersed with regions of high het
erozygosity (Figure S11). Such isolated and randomly dis
tributed peaks of nucleotide diversity throughout the
genome are generally interpreted as signatures of recent
inbreeding, as typical for heavily bottlenecked and geneti
cally depleted species (Robinson et al., 2019). Hence, it is
feasible that inbreeding and genetic drift, especially in
small populations, further promoted lineage divergence
in both species (Hartl & Clark, 2007) but also reduced their
capacity for demographic recovery (Johnson et al., 2010).
A crucial question arising from this study is how such
genetically depleted Tertiary relict tree species could sur
vive, thrive, and successfully compete with taxa occupying
a similar ecological niche. Recent empirical studies and
population genetic simulations demonstrate the central
role of recessive, strongly deleterious mutations in deter
mining extinction risk due to inbreeding depression in
small and isolated populations (Grossen et al., 2020;
Hedrick & Garcia-Dorado, 2016; Kyriazis et al., 2021; Robin
son et al., 2016; Xue et al., 2015). In this study, we gener
ally found a negative and significant (P < 0.05) correlation
between the proportion of mildly deleterious mutations
and population size (Ne) within D. sinensis (Figure 5b). This
result is not unexpected because purifying selection is
more effective in removing mildly deleterious mutations in
larger than smaller populations (Gl´ emin, 2003; Welch
et al., 2008).
Notably, in D. sinensis, the proportion of loss-of-function
(LoF) mutations showed no significant correlation with Ne
(Figure 5b). The smaller South lineage even had relatively
fewer LoF mutations than the larger North lineage (Figure 5a).
This difference is likely related to the contrasting demographic
histories of the two lineages. According to our FASTSIMCOAL2and
SMC++ analyses, the North lineage experienced recent popula
tion growth after the LGM (Figure 4b; Figure S16), likely
because of postglacial northward expansion of D. sinensis
from south of the Yangtze to the Daba-Qinling Mountains (Har
rison et al., 2001). In contrast, the South lineage underwent a
population bottleneck in situ during postglacial/Holocene
periods (Figure S16a) and showed higher levels of individual
inbreeding (Figure 3a,b). Hence, in the smaller South lineage
of D. sinensis, LoF variants were likely exposed more fre
quently in a homozygous state as observed in Figure 5a,and
were therefore purged by inbreeding and purifying selection
(see also Gl´ emin, 2003; Xue et al., 2015). This inference is fur
ther supported by the RX/Y ratios (Figure 5c) and stands in
2023 Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
The Plant Journal, (2024), 117, 177–192
186 YuFeng et al.
 1365313x, 2024, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tpj.16486, Wiley Online Library on [06/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
contrast to observations made in the smallest population MLP
of D. dyeriana (discussed below), where LoF variants appar
ently accumulated rather than being purged.
Living on the verge of extinction
Concern about the survival of ‘living fossil’ trees, and criti
cally endangered species more generally, is focused
largely on the threat from increased anthropogenic pres
sure. If population sizes have decreased to a threshold size,
recovery will be constrained and populations (and species)
may enter an ‘extinction vortex’ (Hutchings, 2015; Yang
et al., 2018). This, in particular, could be the case for the LZ
and MLP lineages of D. dyeriana, which are presently
located outside of the Wenshan National Reserve (WNR)
and thus exposed to human disturbance (Zhang, 2000; see
also Appendix S1. Based on our FASTSIMCOAL2 and SMC++
analyses, the LZ and MLP lineages experienced a more
massive and serious decrease in Ne than WS over the last
5000 years (Figure 4d; Figure S16, Table S21). Likely as a
consequence, MLP currently has the smallest range and
population size among all three lineages of D. dyeriana,
but still harbors higher levels of nucleotide diversity and
genomic heterozygosity than LZ and WS (Table S14;
Figure 3a). Previous studies have suggested that vegetative
reproduction and the long-lived nature of the clones can
mitigate the impact of genetic drift, preventing the loss of
genetic variation in smaller populations (Gargiulo et al.,
2018; Young et al., 1996). This also seems to explain why
small-sized lineages of Tertiary relict trees (LZ, MLP) can
still retain considerable heterozygosity (MLP), and thus
despite historical population decline (see also Robinson
et al., 2016).
The LZ and MLP lineages were found to harbor more
recessive DEL mutations as compared to WS lineage
(Figure 5c; Figure S18), but have relatively smaller RX/Y
values. This argues for a mechanism whereby these highly
recessive DEL mutations can be removed by strong genetic
drift in these populations experiencing recent severe bot
tlenecks (Gl´ emin, 2003). Nonetheless, it is noteworthy that
the total number of DEL in LZ and MLP was still equal to or
greater than that in the WS lineage (Figure 5a). By contrast,
despite exhibiting a degree of purging of strongly deleteri
ous mutations in LZ and MLP as manifested by RX/Y values
(Figure 5c; Figure S18), the two smaller-sized lineages of
D. dyeriana harbored substantially higher proportions of
LoF mutations and larger proportions of fixed LoF muta
tions as compared to the larger-sized WS lineage located
within WNR (Figure 5a). This suggests that partial purging
of strongly deleterious mutations was not sufficient to
erase a substantial fraction of this type of mutation load
due to reduced efficacy of purifying selection in the small
isolated populations (Gl´ emin, 2003; Khan et al., 2021). In
fact, this pattern mirrors those found in other threatened
species that have experienced recent severe population
bottlenecks (Canis lupus: Robinson et al., 2019; Cyprinodon
diabolis: Tian et al., 2022); and it clearly contradicts the
notion that strongly deleterious mutations are more likely
to be purged from small, bottlenecked populations
(Hedrick & Garcia-Dorado, 2016; Robinson et al., 2018;
Yang et al., 2018). Thus, for D. dyeriana, our mutation load
results and negative correlations between population size
(Ne and Nc) and LoF mutations (Figures 5a,b) generally
support the theory prediction that threatened species living
in small populations will have a high mutation load (van
Oosterhout, 2020).
Nonetheless, any further decline (e.g., due to human
disturbance and climate change) would cause strongly del
eterious recessive alleles (carried as heterozygotes in a his
torically large population) to quickly become homozygous
through inbreeding, thereby exacerbating the severity of
inbreeding depression (Charlesworth & Willis, 2009; Kyria
zis et al., 2021). According to our field observations, seed
ling establishment is surprisingly low in the LZ and MLP
populations of D. dyeriana (Table S1) (Qiu et al., 2007).
Moreover, the higher proportion of clonal individuals
genetically inferred for LZ and MLP than WS (Table S17)
indicates an increased proportion of vegetative propaga
tion in small and isolated populations of this species, as
reported for other ‘living fossil’ trees (e.g., Lin et al., 2022;
Tang et al., 2011, 2012). While providing a short-term evo
lutionary solution to achieving reproductive assurance in
unfavorable environmental conditions (Lindborg & Eriks
son, 2004), a shift towards increased vegetative propaga
tion, combined with long generation times in these
Tertiary relict trees, may hinder the purging of strongly
deleterious mutations; this in turn can result in a rapid
accumulation of deleterious alleles throughout the
genome, ultimately trapping small isolated populations in
an extinction vortex (Lynch et al., 1995; McKey et al., 2010;
Ramu et al., 2017). In line with this assumption, our results
show that increased accumulation of LoF mutations in
MLP and LZ, possibly due to increased genetic drift and
reduced selection efficacy, has resulted in the fixation of
LoF mutations in functionally important genes related to
stimulus response, RNA catabolic process and seed devel
opment (Figure S17, Table S27).
Although our estimates of mutation load do not
directly measure fitness, there is empirical evidence that
LoF mutations are, on average, deleterious (Eyre-Walker &
Keightleyet al., 2007), which may have severely deleterious
consequences for the possible future survival of D. dyeriana,
as recently demonstrated for other organisms (e.g., inbred
gray wolf: G´ omez-S´ anchez et al., 2018; Robinson
et al., 2019; Devils Hole pupfish: Tian et al., 2022). There
fore, given all this evidence, the currently unprotected MLP
and LZ lineages of D. dyeriana should have top conserva
tion priority, as both represent separate evolutionary sig
nificant units (ESUs) (Moritz, 1994), and appear to have a
2023 Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
The Plant Journal, (2024), 117, 177–192
Conservation genomics of Dipteronia 187
 1365313x, 2024, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tpj.16486, Wiley Online Library on [06/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
greater mutation load than the protected WS lineage.
Moreover, rather than just maintaining extant population
sizes of LZ and MLP, future efforts should focus on their
genetic rescue by reforesting them with individuals
screened for low genetic load, for example, from WS.
CONCLUSIONS
The two extant species of Dipteronia evolved indepen
dently for more than 50 million years with little morpho
logical change but experienced different demographic
histories since the late Miocene. Our genome-scale ana
lyses of each species are the first to provide insights into
the genomic landscape of deleterious variation in Tertiary
relict trees. Our results suggest that the widespread
D. sinensis repeatedly recovered from demographic bottle
necks over late Tertiary/Quaternary periods of adverse cli
mate conditions, while the population size of the narrow
endemic D. dyeriana has steadily decreased since the late
Miocene, and especially after the LGM. The more efficient
purging of deleterious mutations in D. sinensis may have
facilitated its survival and repeated demographic recovery.
By contrast, in D. dyeriana, increased genetic drift and
reduced selection efficacy, due to recent drastic population
declines and a likely preponderance of vegetative propaga
tion, resulted in the fixation of strongly deleterious muta
tions (especially in functionally important genes of the two
smaller lineages LZ and MLP), reduced fitness and continu
ous population decline. These effects likely have detrimen
tal consequences for the species’ future viability and
adaptive potential.
Given the large number of deleterious variations in
D. dyeriana, as likewise observed in other small and iso
lated populations of endangered species (Tian et al.,
2022), management strategies could prioritize minimizing
deleterious variation in order to potentially maximize
mean absolute fitness (van Oosterhout, 2020). With this
approach, genomic data should be used to identify indi
viduals with the fewest number of strongly deleterious
variants from the large source population for genetic res
cue (Kyriazis et al., 2021). Moreover, in future conserva
tion efforts, careful predictions of putative phenotypic
effects of highly deleterious variants could be instructive
in understanding future inbreeding depression, and these
variants could potentially be used as ‘early warning signs’
for population decline (Khan et al., 2021). Taken together,
our results thus demonstrate that contrasting demo
graphic histories have different effects on the extent of
accumulation and purging of putatively deleterious muta
tions that likely determine the long-term survival and
extinction risk of Tertiary relict trees. More broadly, these
insights have important implications for the genetic man
agement of deleterious variants in small and isolated
populations of Tertiary relict trees, and flowering plants in
general, in the increasingly fragmented landscape of the
modern world.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Genome sequencing, assembly, annotation, and
comparative genomic analyses
We collected fresh young leaves from one adult tree each of Dip
teronia sinensis and D. dyeriana in the Niubeiliang National Natu
ral Reserve (Shaanxi, China) and Kunming Botanical Garden
(Yunnan, China; transplanted from Wenshan National Reserve,
WNR), respectively. We sequenced the genome of each individual
using a combination of PacBio single-molecule long reads and
Illumina short reads and further improved the assembly by adding
10× Genomics linked-reads. Then, Hi-C libraries were sequenced
to assist the chromosome-level assembly. Gene prediction was
conducted through a combination of homology-based inference,
ab initio prediction, and transcripts from RNA sequencing. A com
bined strategy based on homology alignment and de novo were
also applied in our repetitive element annotation pipeline (see
details in Appendix S2).
The two genomes of Dipteronia (D. sinensis and D. dyeriana)
and those of two other members of Hippocastanoideae, Acer
yangbiense (Yang et al., 2019) and A. truncatum (Ma et al., 2020),
were included in the genome syntenic analysis. A mutation rate
for this subfamily was calculated from synonymous, four-fold
degenerate sites (FFS) in single-copy orthologous sequences
shared by the two Dipteronia species and the two Acer species.
Vitis vinifera (Vitaceae), which lacks a recent whole-genome dupli
cation (WGD) event (Jaillon et al., 2007), was included to infer
whether the two Dipteronia genomes have undergone recent
WDG events. For our time-calibrated phylogenetic reconstruc
tions, including analyses of gene family evolution, we included
the above five species plus 11 others from the Rosid clade of
angiosperms (Folk et al., 2018). Positively selected genes (PSGs)
in each Dipteronia species were identified by branch-site
likelihood-ratio tests (LRTs) using the program CODEML from the
PAML package v4.9 (Yang, 2007). Gene ontology (GO) enrichment
analysis was conducted on the corresponding orthologous genes
in Arabidopsis thaliana. See detailed methods of this section in
Appendix S2.
Field studies, population sampling, and whole-genome
resequencing
Individual leaf samples were collected from seven populations
(n = 40) of D. dyeriana and 16 populations (n = 54) of D. sinensis
(Tables S1 and S2). In populations with more than 10 adult indi
viduals, samples were taken more than 10 meters apart; other
wise, all adult individuals were sampled (see Appendix S1 for
details). For D. dyeriana, our field studies (Appendix S1) showed
that the seven populations of D. dyeriana covered 545 716 m2,
with a total census size (Nc) of 9780 adult trees, and with indiv
idual populations ranging from 1013 m2 (MLP, Nc = 5) to
236 113 m2 (CJZ, Nc = 6737; Table S1).
For whole-genome resequencing of all 94 individuals, TRIMMO
MATIC v0.39 (Bolger et al., 2014) was used to remove adapter
sequences, potential contamination, and low-quality bases. All of
the trimmed reads of each individual were then mapped to their
corresponding reference genomes using BOWTIE v2.2.5 (Langmead
& Salzberg, 2012). Duplicate alignments were marked using PICARD
2023 Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
The Plant Journal, (2024), 117, 177–192
188 YuFeng et al.
 1365313x, 2024, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tpj.16486, Wiley Online Library on [06/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
tools v1.1 (http://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/). GATK HAPLOTYPECAL
LER v3.5 was used to call variants. Identified single nucleotide poly
morphisms (SNPs) were filtered by “QD < 5.0 || FS > 10.0 || MQ
< 40.0 || SOR > 2 || MQRankSum < 3.0 || MQRankSum > 3.0 ||
ReadPosRankSum < 2.0 || ReadPosRankSum > 2.0 || Inb > 0.4
|| EH < 5” with additional filtering steps including removing: (1)
SNPs with more than two alleles; (2) genotypes with average qual
ity scores (mean GQ) < 20, or extremely low (< one-third average
depth) or extremely high (> 10 average depth) coverage; and (3)
SNPs with more than half missing genotypes.
Population structure, genome-wide genetic diversity, and
inbreeding
For each Dipteronia species, population structure was assessed by
Bayesian clustering in ADMIXTURE v1.23 (Alexander et al., 2009)
based on unlinked and putatively neutral (i.e., intergenic) SNPs.
The number of genetic clusters (K) was set to vary from 2 to 10,
with the optimal K selected by the lowest cross-validation error.
To further examine population genetic relationships, we subjected
the above SNP dataset to both a principal component analysis
(PCA) in GCTA v1.24 (Yang et al., 2011) and a maximum likelihood
(ML) tree analysis in RAXML v8 (Stamatakis 2014). For each species
and intraspecific lineage (as identified by ADMIXTURE), we further
calculated polymorphism statistics in PIXY v1.0.0 (Korunes &
Samuk, 2021) and VCFTOOLS v0.1.16 (Danecek et al., 2011) along the
genome in 100-kb non-overlapping windows, including nucleotide
diversity (θπ), Watterson’s estimator (θW), and Tajima’s D. Contem
porary effective population size (Ne) for each species and lineage
was calculated using the formua: Ne ¼
θW
4 μ (Wright, 1931). In addi
tion, we used KING v2.2.5 (Manichaikul et al., 2010) to assess the
genetic relatedness (kinship coefficient) between individuals
of each lineage. Finally, we used VCFTOOLS v0.1.16 (Danecek
et al., 2011) and PLINK v1.9 (Purcell et al., 2007) to calculate individ
ual, genome-based coefficients of homozygosity or ‘autozygosity’
(in terms of FROH) and heterozygosity (H), as well as ‘classical’
individual- and population-based estimates of inbreeding (FIS)
(see Appendix S3 for details).
Demographic inference and simulations
Because of their relative advantages and limitations, we used four
complementary methods to infer the demographic history of each
Dipteronia species, based on the re-sequencing data of nine indi
viduals of D. sinensis and six of D. dyeriana, representing each
regional lineage per species. First, we used the pairwise sequen
tially Markovian coalescent (PSMC) method (Li & Durbin, 2011) to
infer historical changes in Ne based on representative individuals
of each lineage per species. However, the PSMC approach should
be treated with caution when dealing with evolutionary histories
more recent than 20–30 thousand years ago (Schiffels & Dur
bin, 2014), or when coverage is low (Nadachowska-Brzyska
et al., 2016). Therefore, we also applied the sequentially Markov
ian coalescent (SMC) method, implemented in SMC++ v1.13 (Ter
horst et al., 2016), as well as the program STAIRWAY PLOT v2.0 (Liu &
Fu, 2020) to estimate recent changes in Ne with greater accuracy
(Liu & Fu, 2020). Finally, we employed coalescent simulations in
FASTSIMCOAL2 v2.6 (Excoffier et al., 2013), using unfolded joint site
frequency spectra (u-SFS) generated from unlinked intergenic
SNPs. The scenarios and corresponding prior distributions of the
FASTSIMCOAL2 parameters (e.g., lineage divergence, lineage diver
gence times, Ne) were set according to results from ADMIXTURE and
the above demographic analyses (e.g., PSMC; see Appendix S4
for details).
Estimates of selection efficacy and mutation load
To evaluate selection efficacy for D. sinensis and D. dyeriana,we
estimated nucleotide diversity (π) at nonsynonymous (zero-fold)
and synonymous (four-fold) sites (i.e., πN and πS, respectively) for
each species and lineage using an in-house PERL script (Chen, Lu,
et al., 2017). To estimate their genome-wide levels of mutation
load, we classified the SNPs of both D. sinensis and D. dyeriana
into synonymous, nonsynonymous, and putative loss-of-function
(LoF) mutations, using SNPEFF v4.3 (Cingolani et al., 2012). The effect
of the nonsynonymous SNPs was assessed using SIFT4G (Vaser
et al., 2016) (database: UniRef90) and PROVEAN v1.1.5 (Choi
et al., 2012) (database: NR). Positions with a SIFT score <0.05 and
PROVEAN score < 2.5 were predicted to be deleterious (hereafter
‘mildly deleterious mutations’). To mitigate reference bias, we
included Acer yangbiense and A. truncatum (see above) for the
purpose of polarizing variable sites into ancestral and derived
states. Specifically, the two Acer species and D. sinensis served as
outgroups for D. dyeriana, while both Acer species and D. dyeriana
were utilized as outgroups for D. sinensis. We filtered SNPs under
the additional two criteria for the subsequent analyses: they had no
missing genotypes, and they exhibited consistent homozygous
states across all three outgroup species. We used EST-SFS v2.03 to
infer the probability of the derived versus ancestral allelic state,
with a probability cutoff set at 0.95, as described by Keightley and
Jackson (2018). The ancestral allele was set as the non-deleterious
allele, and the derived allele as the potential deleterious allele.
We calculated deleterious mutation load using the following
two indexes. The proportion of deleterious mutations in each cate
gory was calculated as: pa ¼
derived alleles
Ntotal
Nclass
SNPs 2 
, where Nclass
derived allele is the
number of derived alleles (counting heterozygotes once and
homozygotes twice) in each category (mildly deleterious and LoF)
of SNPs, and Ntotal
SNPs is the number of SNPs used in the annotation
of deleterious mutations (see Results). The proportion of heterozy
gous (p0/1) and homozygous (p1/1) derived genotypes in each cate
Nclass
gory was calculated as: pg ¼
genotype
Ntotal
SNPs
. Values of pa and pg were
calculated for each individual and compared among species and
lineages through Wilcoxon tests. Besides the above statistics, we
also scaled the numbers of derived alleles/genotypes of DEL and
LoF SNPs by the corresponding numbers of synonymous SNPs to
evaluate the efficacy of purifying selection at the individual level
(scaled additive load, Gonz´ alez-Martı´nez et al., 2017). To further
test for differences in the purging of deleterious mutations between
populations, we calculated the expected number of derived muta
tions at each variable site in one genome sampled from population
X that are not seen in a randomly selected genome from population
Y and vice versa; and we calculated a ratio of the two counts: RX/Y
(Do et al., 2015). Following Do et al. (2015), we used a random set of
putatively neutral SNPs (i.e., intergenic SNPs) for standardization,
which makes RX/Y robust against sampling effects and population
substructure. For a specific set of putative deleterious sites, RX/Y > 1
denotes excess of derived deleterious mutations in population X
compared to population Y, while RX/Y < 1 means deficiency of
derived deleterious mutations (i.e., population X has stronger purg
ing of deleterious mutations than population Y). For each species,
we calculated RX/Y for small (X) vs. large (Y) populations, with popu
lation size determined by Ne calculated for lineages of both species
and Nc of the investigated populations of D. dyeriana. Finally, to
assess whether deleterious mutations in small populations led to a
reduction in fitness, we used homology-based inferences
to functionally annotate genes with fixed deleterious mutations in
the South lineage of D. sinensis and the MLP lineage of D. dyeriana.
2023 Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
The Plant Journal, (2024), 117, 177–192
Conservation genomics of Dipteronia 189
 1365313x, 2024, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tpj.16486, Wiley Online Library on [06/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
ACCESSION NUMBERS
All sequencing data used in this study have been deposited in the
NCBI SRA database with the Bioproject number PRJNA796066.
These reference genomes and gene annotations have been
uploaded to the NCBI Genome database under accessions JAN
JYI000000000 and JANJYJ000000000 and China National GeneBank
DataBase (CNGBdb) under the accession CNP0002617. The custom
scripts used in this study have been uploaded to the GitHub reposi
tory (https://github.com/Fengyaa/Dipteronia_genome/).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Xinxin Zhu, Shuai Liao, Xinpeng Zhou, Guifeng Cui,
Shaanxi Niubeiliang National Natural Reserve Management
Bureau, Dalaoling National Nature Reserve Management Bureau,
Baoxing County Forestry Bureau, Houhe National Nature Reserve
Management Bureau, Wenshan National Nature Reserve Manage
ment Bureau, Malipo County Forestry Bureau, and Kunming Insti
tute of Botany for assistance with sampling; and Dr. Tao Ma from
Sichuan University for valuable comments and discussions. We
also gratefully acknowledge the valuable comments by three
anonymous reviewers on a previous version of this manuscript.
This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of
China (grant Nos. 2022YFF1301703, 2017YFA0605100), the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant Nos.
31872652 and 32161143003), and the Science and Technology
Basic Resources Investigation Program of China (grant No.
2017FY100100).
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
All authors confirm that they have no conflict of interest.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
YQ conceived the project. YQ, YF, and KMO designed the
experiments and coordinated research activities. YF, RL,
PL, and SZ collected samples. YF, JC, XZ, and SZ analyzed
data. KMO and JQ contributed to the interpretation of
results. YF, YQ, KMO, and HPC wrote and revised the man
uscript. All authors read and approved the manuscript.